Add universal relations service (#1602)
plone/plone.restapi: docs/source/endpoints/relations.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:

>     'description': 'Create, query, and delete relations between content items with the /@relations endpoint.'

Reviewer: I'm not sure how special characters will affect SEO, so I would just drop them from the HTML meta tags.

```suggestion
    'description': 'Create, query, and delete relations between content items with the relations endpoint.'
```

>     'property=og:description': 'Create, query, and delete relations between content items with the /@relations endpoint.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    'property=og:description': 'Create, query, and delete relations between content items with the relations endpoint.'
```

    'property=og:title': 'Relations'
    'keywords': 'Plone, plone.restapi, REST, API, relations, service, endpoint'

> ---

Reviewer: All the above should be double-quoted (`"` not `'`) for consistency with the Python script that generates them and the other files.

(restapi-relations-label)=

# Relations

Plone's relations represent binary relationships between content objects.

> A single relation is defined by source, target and relation name.

Reviewer: Oxford comma.

```suggestion
A single relation is defined by source, target, and relation name.
```

Relations are either defined by content type schema fields (`RelationChoice` or `RelationList`) or are of type `isReferencing` or `iterate-working-copy`.

- Relations based on fields of a content type schema are editable by users.
- Relations `isReferencing` (block text links to a Plone content object) and `iterate-working-copy` (working copy is enabled and the content object is a working copy) are not editable. They are created and deleted with links in text, respectively creating and deleting working copies.

Relations can be created, queried, and deleted by interacting through the `@relations` endpoint on the site root.

> Querying relations with the `@relations` endpoint requires the `zope2.View` permission on the source object and target object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Querying relations with the `@relations` endpoint requires the `zope2.View` permission on both the source and target objects.
```

> Therefore results include relations if and only if source and target are accessible by the querying user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore results include relations if and only if both the source and target are accessible by the querying user.
```

> Creating and deleting relations requires the respective permission on the content object.

Reviewer 2: You have to have the View permission on the source and target in order to create or delete a relation? Or some other permission?

Author: Yes, the text is updated to:
Creating and deleting relations requires `zope2.View` permission on the target object and `cmf.ModifyPortalContent` permission on the source object.`

(restapi-relations-getting-statistics-for-all-relations-label)=

## Getting statistics for all relations

> The call without any parameters returns statistics on all existing relations the user has access to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The call without any parameters returns statistics on all existing relations to which the user has access.
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_catalog_get_stats.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_catalog_get_stats.resp
:language: http
```

(restapi-relations-querying-relations-label)=

## Querying relations

Relations can be queried by one single source, one single target or one single relation type.
Combinations are allowed.  

> source and target are a UID or a path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source and target must be either a UID or path.
```

> Queried relations require `View permission` on source and target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Queried relations require `View` permission on both the source and target.
```

> Therefore relations without permission to access by current user are omitted from the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the user lacks permission to access these relations, then they are omitted from the query results.
```

> The relations are grouped by relation name, source and target are provided in summarizer format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The relations are grouped by relation name, source, and target, and are provided in a summarized format.
```

```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_get_source_by_path.resp
:language: http
```

Query relations of a **source** object by UID:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_get_source_by_uid.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_get_source_by_uid.resp
:language: http
```

Query relations by **relation name and source**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_get_source_and_relation.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_get_source_and_relation.resp
:language: http
```

Query relations to a **target**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_get_target.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_get_target.resp
:language: http
```

(restapi-relations-creating-relations-label)=

## Creating relations

> Relations can be created by providing a list of: source, target, and name of the relation.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relations can be created by providing a list of the source, target, and name of the relation.
```

> Source and target can be UID or path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source and target must be either a UID or path.
```

If the relation is based on a `RelationChoice` or `RelationList` field of the source object, the value of the field is created or updated accordingly.

Add by **path**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post.resp
:language: http
```

Add by **UID**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_with_uid.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_with_uid.resp
:language: http
```

**Failure**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_failure.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_failure.resp
:language: http
```

(restapi-relations-deleting-relations-label)=

## Deleting relations

> Relations can be deleted: either by relation name, all relations of an object, or all relations to a target.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relations can be deleted either by relation name, all relations of an object, or all relations to a target.
```

Relations can be created, queried, and deleted by interacting through the `@relations` endpoint on the site root.
Querying relations with the `@relations` endpoint requires the `zope2.View` permission on both the source and target objects.
Therefore results include relations if and only if both the source and target are accessible by the querying user.
Creating and deleting relations requires `zope2.View` permission on the target object and `cmf.ModifyPortalContent` permission on the source object.

(restapi-relations-getting-statistics-for-all-relations-label)=

## Getting statistics for all relations

The call without any parameters returns statistics on all existing relations to which the user has access.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_catalog_get_stats.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_catalog_get_stats.resp
:language: http
```

(restapi-relations-querying-relations-label)=

## Querying relations

Relations can be queried by one single source, one single target or one single relation type.

> Combinations are allowed.  

Author: This is on purpose. But OK I'm fine to abstain from a line break. Allover the relations.md. Will check.

        "http://localhost:55001/plone/document-2",
      ],
      "items_total": 1
    }
  }
}
```

(restapi-relations-creating-relations-label)=

## Creating relations

Relations can be created by providing a list of the source, target, and name of the relation.
The source and target must be either a UID or path.

If the relation is based on a `RelationChoice` or `RelationList` field of the source object, the value of the field is created or updated accordingly.

Add by **path**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post.resp
:language: http
```

Add by **UID**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_with_uid.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_with_uid.resp
:language: http
```

**Failure**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_failure.req
```

> 

Author: Yes, realized this also just now.

### Delete a list of single relations

by **path**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_path.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_path.resp
:language: http
```

by **UID**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_uid.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_uid.resp
:language: http
```

**Failures** are listed in response:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_failure.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_failure.resp
:language: http
```

### Delete relations by relation name

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_relationname.req
```

> <!-- Uncomment with https://github.com/plone/plone.api/pull/502 merged

Author: Ui, yes. Uncommented.

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_relationname.resp
:language: http
``` -->

### Delete relations by source

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_source.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_source.resp
:language: http
```

> Delete relations by source UID or source path.

Author: Thanks for the hint. 
It would be consequent. I prefer not to add an example, cause this is obvious, isn't it?

> Delete relations by source UID or source path.

Reviewer: Yes, I thought so, too. One is plenty. I think the developer can figure out the rest... API.

### Delete relations by target

> 

Author: Same reason like above for source.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_target.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_target.resp
:language: http
```

Delete relations by target UID or target path.

> ### Delete relations by combination of source/target and relation name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Delete relations by relation name and either a source or target
```

Author: In fact it's possible to delete by any combination of two or even all three of source, target and relation name.
Maybe you can come up with a proper wording?

And I think one example like the existing is enough. But I'm open for suggestions.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You can delete relations by their relation name and either a source or target.

In the following example, you would delete a relation by its relation name and target.

```

Author: I streamlined the paragraph on 'Delete a list of relations'. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer: This is good.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_combi.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_combi.resp
:language: http
```

## Fix relations

Broken relations can be fixed by releasing and re-indexing them.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_rebuild.req
```

> 

Reviewer: Does this request return a response?

Author: No, it's a '204 No Content'

Reviewer: Incorporated into narrative text to avoid a pedantic example.

> In rare cases flushing the `intIds` is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In rare cases, you may need to flush the `intIds`.
```

> Rebuild relations with flushing the `intIds` by posting the following request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can rebuild relations by flushing the `intIds` with the following HTTP POST request.
```

> Be careful and think well before flushing if your code relies on `intIds`.

Reviewer: This should be either a warning or danger admonition, but I went with warning. Maybe it should be danger? How bad could this be if they don't take care?

````suggestion

```{warning}
If your code relies on `intIds`, you should take caution and think carefully before you flush them.
```
````

Author: It's destructive. So 'danger' would be also appropriate.

If the relation is based on a `RelationChoice` or `RelationList` field of the source object, the value of the field is updated accordingly.

Create a relation by **path**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post.resp
:language: http
```

Create a relation by **UID**:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_with_uid.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_with_uid.resp
:language: http
```

If either the source or target do not exist, then an attempt to create a relation will fail, and will return an error.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_failure.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_post_failure.resp
:language: http
```

(restapi-relations-deleting-relations-label)=

## Deleting relations

> Relations can be deleted by relation name, source object, target object, or a combination of these.

Reviewer: Change from passive to active voice, and address the reader.

```suggestion
You can delete relations by relation name, source object, target object, or a combination of these.
```

> Relations can also be deleted by providing a list of relations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also delete relations by providing a list of relations.
```

:language: http
```

### Delete relations by relation name

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_relationname.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_relationname.resp
:language: http
```

### Delete relations by source

You can delete relations by either source UID or path.

The following example shows how to delete a relation by source path.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_source.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_source.resp
:language: http
```

### Delete relations by target

You can delete relations by either target UID or path.

The following example shows how to delete a relation by target path.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_target.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_target.resp
:language: http
```

> ### Delete relations by combination of source, target and relation name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Delete relations by a combination of source, target, and relation name
```

> You can delete relations by their relation name and either a source or target.

Reviewer: This is more accurate now.

```suggestion
You can delete relations by a combination of either any two of their relation name, source, and target, or a combination of all three.
```

In the following example, you would delete a relation by its relation name and target.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_combi.req
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/relations_del_combi.resp
:language: http
```

## Fix relations

Broken relations can be fixed by releasing and re-indexing them.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A successfully fixed relation will return a `204 No Content` response.

```

- Relations based on fields of a content type schema are editable by users.
- Relations `isReferencing` (block text links to a Plone content object) and `iterate-working-copy` (working copy is enabled and the content object is a working copy) are not editable. They are created and deleted with links in text, respectively creating and deleting working copies.

> Relations can be created, queried, and deleted by interacting through the `@relations` endpoint on the site root.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relations can be created, queried, and deleted by interacting through the `@relations` endpoint on the site root.
```

Querying relations with the `@relations` endpoint requires the `zope2.View` permission on the source object and target object.

> Therefore results include relations if and only if source and target are accessible by the querying user.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore results include relations if and only if source and target are accessible by the querying user.
```
